
People to be informed in case of a release:

Michael Mishchenko <mmishchenko at giss.nasa.gov>


A lot of outdated stuff in this file. Somebody should clean this up one day. :-)


AvE 2000-08-22: Check that partition funciton coefficients are valid, 
                some species are not defined, nevertheless a dummy
                partition function coefficient is given. check that 
                the returned value of the partition function (NOT
                the ratio) is larger than zero after calling.

AvE 04.09.2000: Agnes Perrin mentioned that the simple scheme to calculate
	       	partition functions at different temperature is accurate enough,
		so one should actually perfom an accuracy check.

		simple scheme: 

		Q_rot(T')=Q_rot(T)*(T'/T)**1.5 for non linear molecule  
		and
		Q_rot(T')=Q_rot(T)*(T'/T)   for a linear molecule

		This way might be more efficient timewise.

AvE 2000-09-27: There is optimization potential in the lineshape.cc file,
		read FIXME comments over there.

SAB 2000-11-08: Send information about ARTS to Gerald Nedolua for
                destribution to NDSC.

SAB 2000-11-10: Adapt sample control file in user guide to new method
                and WSV names.  

SAB 2000-12-04: Make WSV groups (groups.cc) and Token types (token.h,
                token.cc) consistent. (Do this after online doc in
                methods.cc is updated to avoid conflicts when people
                check in.) 

AvE 2001-04-03: I just tried to run some calculations with arts and the 
                new hitran 2000 edition, and of course, ran into problems. 
                I did update arts a bit with the new hitran species, but 
		just had to find out that more has changed. For example 
		Hitran has now more H2O isotopes.
 
		Somebody has to update arts to the 2000 edition. 

SAB 2001-09-18: Thomas, please move cloud water vapor saturation
		adjustment out of AtmFromRaw1D as soon as
                possible. Make a standalone
		method out of this. Use only lowercase letters for keywords, to be
		consistent with other methods.

SAB 2001-09-18: Thomas, please rename seltags to seltgs. Tgs means
		"tag groups", not "tags". (Each element of seltgs is a tag group,
		consisting of one or more tags.)

PE 2001-09-19:  All: WRITE GOOD AND DETAILED ON-LINE INFORMATION.

PE 2001-09-19:  All: The consistency of function input should be checked. 
                I will make some functions to faciliate this.

PE 2001-09-19:  All: remove old pieces of code in the files that no longer
		is of any interest.

OLE 2001-09-21: Make the HDF part optional. Let the configure script determine
                whether HDF is installed or not and depending on that include the
                binary methods. To make this more convient all HDF related functions
                should be moved into a separate source file.

SAB 2001-09-24: Thomas: Please put in detailed online documentation
                for cont_description_names.  

SAB 2001-09-24: Automatically remove WSVs that are no longer
                needed. (Do this after the workshop, though, seems to
                be not too urgent.) 

SAB 2001-09-24: After the workshop, implement a new ASCII output
                format. Think about consistant naming of
                methods. Don't forget los, lines, lines_per_tg, and
                raw_vmrs read/write.

SAB 2001-09-25: Rename Array<OneTag> to TagGroup and Array<
                Array<OneTag> > to ArrayOfTagGroup. (After update of
                online docs, to avoid conflicts.)

SAB 2001-09-25: Thomas: Write doxygen header for function
                interpp_cloud in file atm_funcs.cc.

PE 2001-09-26:  Change batchname to be a keyword input to ybatchCalc when
                revising this function.

PE 2001-09-26:  Go through workspace.cc (I have done this for "my" variables).

STR 2001-09-26: Some points pointed out by Stefan.
		1. Description of Scheme for tag groups as given in Bredbeck 
		   proceedings-I to be included in the user guide
		2. in function tgsDefine, rename keyword tags to tgs
                3. Include definition of continuum tags in online documentation

PE 2001-09-26:  The WSV h20_abs, n2_abs ... shall be removed.

PE 2001-09-26:  The variable *vmrs* shall also be reduced along with
                *abs_per_tgs*.

PE 2001-10-05:  Check file functions for negative Index.

PE 2002-10-03: Plans for AUG:

	       Hi             

	       I sat down to catch up with the writing in AUG, but I started to look
	       around and then noticed some things. I started to write down what I
	       found. The list is found in Sec. 1.1, but I have also included it below.
	       Please, try to keep the list updated, and write down what you plan to
	       do.

	       I don't bring this up because I think we have been very lazy. On the
	       contrary, I think we have been quite good. However, it would be very
	       good to fix the last pieces to make the user guide a proper document,
	       without to many FIXME. And the longer we wait to fix these details the
	       more booring it will be, and the risk increases that we don't care so
	       much about the user guide.

	       I have assigned a person, or two, for the different points. This is just
	       a starting point for the division of work. But don't just remove your
	       name from the list in AUG, with out having someone else to put there.

	       Note especially the first point. We have once decided to have
	       sub-folders in Fig/. One for each LaTeX file. Please, let's try to fix
	       this rather quickly and so we can clean up Figs/ from old figire not
	       used anymore.


	       * Create sub-folders to /Fig, one folder for each file. The folders
	         shall have the same name as the corresponding file. [All]
	       * Write this section. [Stefan/Patrick]
	       * Section 2 is marked as under construction. Correct? Update or
	         remove comment. [Stefan]
	       * A short introduction about math should be put into Sec. 3.1. 
	         Is this section sufficient, or shall more details be given somewhere
	         else?
	         [ Stefan ]
	       * Introduction to absorption and refractive index has to be written.
	         The corresponding chapter in Part 1 is empty.
	         [???]
	       * Something shall be written about polarisation and Stokes in Section
	          3.3. [Christian/Claudia]
	       * Section 3.5.3 on Sensor polarisation to be written. Finer details
	         shall be put in a chapter on Sensor characteristics in Part 1. 
	         [Patrick/Christian]
	       * The theory we use for radiative transfer shall be described in Part
	         IV in as general terms as possible. The start of the scattering
	         chapter
	         should be moved to the new chapter. The case without scattering can
	         then
	         be described as a special case of the general expression. To gather
	         the
	         description of radiative transfer should be better than to describe it 
	         in parts at different places in the user guide. [Claudia/Christian]
	       * Finish Section 3.6 (Clear sky radiative transfer) [Patrick]
	       * An introductory part on scattering calculations shall be found
	         in Sec. 3.8 [Claudia/Shreerekha]
	       * The chapter on propagation paths is not up to date. [Patrick]
	       * Start a chapter on clear sky radiative transfer for Part I. [Patrick]
	       * Is scattering chapter OK? [Claudia/Shreerekha]
	       * Fix chapter on agendas. [Stefan]
	       * There are some FIXME in chapter on Polarisation and Stokes Parameters.
	         [Christian]
	       * In the appendix for WSM: The method names appear strange (starts
	         with levelb). The list of input and output varaibles needs a row
	         break.
	         [Oliver]

PE 2003-03-31: Stefan: By mistake I used pressures outside the defined range for an
               absorption lookup table, but I did not get any error message. Just an
               assert.
